<1>
Research paper titles in literature, linguistics and science: dimensions of
attraction Madeline Haggan Department of English Language and Literature,
Faculty of Arts, Kuwait University, PO Box23558 (Safat), Kuwait 13096, Kuwait
Received 24 January 2002; received in revised form 20 April 2003; accepted 2 May
2003 Abstract Although it is a very small part of the research paper, the title
plays an important role as the first point of contact between writer and
potential reader and may decide whether or not the paper is read. Research paper
titles in the widely differing fields of science, literature and linguistics are
studied in detail with a view to showing what researchers from each discipline
implicitly feel are important features in the succinct knowledge transmission
required in title design. Three basic types of titles in the three disciplines
are analyzed: full sentence, compound and a remaining group made up largely of
noun phrases with or without postmodification.  Very clear-cut differences in
frequency and form were found across the three disciplines reflecting
fundamental differences in pragmatic intention inherent in the disciplines
concerned.  Analysis focusses on the role of titles in informing the reader as
to what the paper is about and also in attracting him/her to read the paper.
Discussion of how these functions are met rests on techniques involved in both
information packaging and advertising.  # 2003 Elsevier B.V. All rights
reserved.  Keywords: Research papers; Titles; Advertising; Disciplinary
differences; Noun phrase; Information packaging 1. Introduction The above title
has been chosen with more than usual care since it serves not just as a title
for this paper, but as an illustration of what is now a common research paper
title structure: two noun phrases separated by a colon. Research article titles
have been equated with newspaper headlines (Berkenkotter and Huckin, 1995) but
<2>
this particular format is not usually seen in headlines. Thus, while such
titles may share certain pragmatic functions with headlines— to provide an
initial introduction, to attract attention, to inform, and sometimes to startle—
even this very simple example illustrates the fact that they do not fulfil these
functions in the same way. Both are subject to the same constraints of limited
space and the resulting need to be brief and succinct, so how different can they
be from each other and yet still comply with their common requirements? Is it
possible, in fact, to extract characteristic features of research article
titles? The following analysis looks at this question on an empirical basis by
examining titles from research papers in linguistics, literature and science.
The three areas were selected on the basis that science and literature may be
regarded as representing opposite ends of the genre-based intellectual spectrum.
Fahnestock and Secor (1982, 1989) have expanded on this by referring to the
classical concept of stasis (a system of rhetorical invention leading to a
taxonomy of the types of argument). They point out that, whereas the rhetoric of
science articles rests on the stases of fact, classification and cause, articles
in literature rest on the stasis of a value that their readers already accord to
the work being studied and may be seen as ‘celebrating and reinforcing the
values shared by their readers’ (Fahnestock and Secor, 1982). Linguists are also
concerned with matters relating to fact, classification and cause. However, in a
study comparing introductions to research articles in science, literature and
linguistics, Haggan (1998) has shown that linguists depart from the strictly
scientific model in the way the organization of their papers is indicated and in
their use of the personal point of view. It would, therefore, be of interest to
know how far linguists follow the scientific model as far as the research
article title is concerned. Do contemporary titles therefore, in spite of their
miniature form, encapsulate something of the inherent disciplinary differences
with regard to the presentation of knowledge in these three fields?  2. Corpus
The titles in the analysis were drawn from the holdings of academic journals at
Kuwait University, which are selected and ratified by academic committees of the
departments concerned and are subject to periodic review. As such, they may be
assumed to represent the journals held to be important by researchers in the
respective fields. The only restriction for the present study was that the
journals should be published in the United States or the United Kingdom.
Otherwise they were simply picked at random from the current periodicals shelves
with some attempt being made to ensure a reasonable balance of sub-disciplines,
the aim being to obtain a snapshot of contemporary practice in title
formulation. In almost all cases, each journal was represented by two, usually
consecutive, editions which were the most recent on the day of data collection.
Since journals vary considerably in the number of articles they carry per
edition, the titles selected may have represented all the articles in a
particular edition or up to the first ten in the list of contents where many
articles are carried. This yielded a sample of 237, 207 and 307 titles from 40
literature journals, 44 linguistics journals and 40 science journals
respectively. The complete list of journals is presented in the Appendix.
<3>
A
preliminary analysis was made to derive some quantitative information regarding
titles in the three areas. The figures obtained are presented in Table 1.  It
shows that literature and linguistics titles are of about the same length,
averaging around nine words per title. Science titles, on the other hand, are
nearly half as long again, averaging almost fourteen words per title, a finding
which may be viewed alongside that of Berkenkotter and Huckin (op.cit.) that
there has been a growth in the information content of science titles over the 45
year period they studied.  3. Full-sentence titles The same researchers have
also commented on a parallel development whereby scientific titles increasingly
take the form of a full sentence expressing the results of the study. Thus, in
1989, the last year in their study, they report that 21%, or 25 out of the 120
titles they analysed, were in the form of a full sentence. The first question to
be addressed in the present analysis was, therefore, whether this trend was
supported by the present corpus. In fact, out of the 307 science titles in the
sample, only 26, or 8.5%, were cast in this way, a considerably lower figure
than that obtained by Berkenkotter and Huckin (ibid.). They point out that
full-sentence titles are particularly a feature of biology papers, and,
interestingly, all the cases occurring in the present analysis did indeed fall
under the wide umbrella of biology. However, the discrepancy in numbers between
the two studies indicates that some care must be exercised before making
generalisations about trends. The tendency for scientists to provide
full-sentence titles may be noticeable and growing, but perhaps not to quite the
degree as was thought.  Turning to the other two disciplines, counts showed that
only 10 out of the 237 literature titles (=4.2%) and 9 out of the 207
linguistics titles (=4.3%) involved full-sentence construction. Taking into
consideration the differences in total number of titles in each group, a Chi
square test was conducted on frequencies and reached significance (c=6.2, df=2,
P<0.05) indicating that the null hypothesis could be rejected. The greatest
contribution to c¸ came from the science full-sentence titles which
proportionately were twice as common as those in linguistics and literature.
Apart from these differences in frequency, there are, however, quite striking
differences in the form that such titles take. According to Berkenkotter and
Huckin, the main point regarding full-sentence titles is that they are an
illustration of the growth
<4>
in informativeness of research article titles.
This may be the case as regards the science full-sentence titles in our sample,
but it does not appear to be so with those from the other two disciplines.  3.1.
Science full-sentence titles Six of the twelve full-sentence titles extracted
are given below.  1. Biphasic kinetics of Zn2+ removal from Zn metallothionein
by nitrilotriacetate are associated with differential reactivity of the two
metal clusters 2. Cu2+ ions interact with cell membranes 3. Mlc1p is a light
chain for the unconventional myosin Myo2p in Saccharomyces cerevisiae 4. Barstar
has a highly dynamic hydrophobic core: evidence from molecular dynamics
simulations and nuclear magnetic resonance relaxation data 5. The activity of
oxidized bovine spleen purple acid phosphatase is due to an Fe(III)Zn(II)
‘impurity’ 6. Exposure to context may contribute to within-session changes in
responding The pragmatic features underlying the scientists’ writing are clearly
reflected in these titles. The situation in science now is that the pace and
volume of publication means that there is ever more pressure placed on the
individual who wishes to keep up with the reading in his field. The reader needs
to know as early as possible in the reading process whether or not the paper
contains anything that is of relevance to his own work. The title is the
earliest point of contact between writer and reader, and it has been established
by Bazerman (1985) that academics decide on the basis of the title whether or
not to read further. The writer, therefore, must try to design the title in such
a way that it will attract the attention of other scientists working within his
own narrow specialisation. Hence, the over-arching pragmatic aim must be to
inform, and to inform quickly. If he fails to do this, his work may sink into
oblivion. The full-sentence titles in our science sample clearly illustrate
this: the noun phrases employed indicate the area within which the researcher is
working, while the sentence as a whole presents the general findings of the
study. It is as if the entire study had been condensed into that one sentence,
thereby combining informativeness with economy. On the other hand, although much
is conveyed in relatively few words, these titles are in fact the longest in the
whole group, averaging 16.5 words per title as compared to the mean length of
13.8 words per title in science titles over-all. Closer inspection, however,
reveals something rather surprising. It is generally held that scientists are
cautious in their research-paper writing and surround their pronouncements with
qualifications and hedges (Crompton, 1997).  However, these titles make
confident, unqualified assertions, presented as statements of fact. In only one
is there a hedge (Title 6), where the use of the modal may injects a note of
reservation. Interestingly, all are written using the simple present tense. A
common feature of newspaper headlines is the use of the simple present tense
where normal usage would require the present perfect or the present continuous
(Swan,
<5>
1980). However, this is also accompanied by other features of what is
known as ‘‘block language’’ (Quirk and Greenbaum, 1973) involving omission of
articles and the verb to be. This is certainly not the case here, where the full
sentences are precisely that i.e. complete sentence forms. Thus, the use of the
simple present tense here cannot be taken as evidence of these titles fulfilling
the role of headlines.  Nevertheless, the exclusive use of this tense is a
significant point. According to Quirk et al. (1985), the meanings of the present
tense vary depending on whether the verb is stative or dynamic. Stative verbs
(such as be and have used in titles 3, 4 and 5 above) used in the simple present
indicate the ‘‘timeless present’’ where there is no time limitation on the
states concerned (i.e. they are eternally true), whereas dynamic verbs used in
the present tense (as in the remaining titles above) indicate the habitual
present (p. 179). In either case, the use of the present tense here emphasizes
the note of confident optimism being projected by the writer that what he is
reporting stands true for all time or is not simply a one-off occurrence. One
might, for instance, have expected that, since the scientist is reporting the
results of his particular experiment or study, he might have used the past
tense, thereby in a way limiting the application of his pronouncements to his
particular experiment. Compare, for example The [KIL-d] cytoplasmic genetic
element of yeast results in epigenetic regulation of viral M double stranded RNA
gene expression. with (In our experiment we found that) The [KIL-d] cytoplasmic
genetic element of yeast (always) resulted in epigenetic regulation of viral M
double stranded RNA gene expression. The former sounds much more positive, while
in the latter there is the implicature that the findings are restricted to a
particular study, leaving open the possibility that other studies might not
agree with them. In this, there seems to be a parallel with a certain style used
in advertising, where we might see Kleenso washes cleaner rather than (We found
in our tests that) Kleenso (always) washed cleaner. In fact, the analogy with
advertising seems particularly appropriate. Just as the product manufacturer
cannot allow any doubts to enter the minds of the public as to the unassailable
supremacy of their product, so also must the scientist convey the certainty that
the method, measurements, calculation etc. employed have yielded impregnable
findings. The certainty that is communicated may, in itself, be a feature
attracting a fellow scientist working in the same area. This view of the title
as advertisement gains further credence in the light of the comments of a
scientist reported by Rymer (1988: 235) on the composing processes of eminent
molecular biologists: ‘‘I want to give it a title that’s catchy, that’s very
informative....Gotta sell the stuff. Doesn’t mean that you gotta be dishonest.
But it’s gotta be something that really catches people’s eyes so they stand up
and pay attention.’’ 3.2. Linguistics full-sentence titles Six of the nine
linguistics full sentences titles are presented below for illustration 7.
Theories are buildings revisited 8. ‘I blame the government’ 9. Why are some
verbs learned before other verbs? Effects of input frequency and structure on
children’s early verb use
<6>
10. Does grammaticalization need reanalysis?  11.
‘‘Yes, I agree’’ 12. Who’s next? The melodic Marking of Question vs.
Continuation in Dutch It is obvious that there are some differences between
these and the full-sentence science titles. Title (7) is the only one that seems
to approximate the statements found in the full-sentence science titles. Titles
(8) and (11), although in simple active declarative form, are also contained
within quotation marks. Title (10) is in the form of a question, while Titles
(9) and (12) contain a complete question followed by a complex noun phrase.
Title length is also obviously shorter. If we consider only the full sentences
in all the linguistics full-sentence titles, the mean length is 5.4 words and
even if we calculate the over-all mean length of title (i.e. including any
subsequent noun phrases) the figure becomes inflated to only 7.6 words. Thus,
unlike the case of the science full-sentence titles, linguistics titles
involving a full sentence are shorter than the average title length for all
linguistics titles (8.8 words).  However, perhaps the most striking difference
comes when we consider how the pragmatic aims of the two types of researchers
are achieved. In both cases, the researcher obviously wants to attract people in
the field to read the paper. As we have seen, the scientist achieves this in the
full-sentence titles by packing in information about what has been found in the
research study. Strikingly, full-sentence titles in linguistics do not make
assertions about the results or findings of the paper.  Instead, the writer
makes an attempt to intrigue the reader by presenting a clever, arresting title
which catches the attention and acts as a lure into the article itself.  Title
(7) is, in fact, deceptive. The first line of the paper reveals that the topic
is a re-examination of the conceptual metaphor: THEORIES ARE BUILDINGS suggested
by Lakoff and Johnson in their book Metaphors We Live By (1980).  However, the
capitalization is missing in the title so that this allusion could be lost,
particularly if the reader is not familiar with the work in question. Thus,
revisited could be interpreted as a truncated relative clause modifying
buildings, which does alter the reader’s preliminary expectation of the subject
matter somewhat. Title (8), on the other hand, presents a deliberate play on
words. There is the possibility that the reader might think that, given the
wider emphasis of the journal it was published in (Language Sciences), the
subject-matter might relate to, say, an analysis of the language of political
opinion, although many other linguists reading it would presumably be primed for
it to deal with its actual focus of government (in phonology in this case). The
short but mysterious Title (11) is quickly explained (in the first two lines of
the paper) by the statement that the subject is the idea that an affirmative
response to a Yes–No question constitutes an agreement with the question. Title
(12), however, is perhaps a little more playful since it deals with
conversational turn keeping as signalled by certain intonation contours.  The
use of the question form is another well-known rhetorical device to draw the
reader in by identifying the topic (Kane and Peters, 1966). This is illustrated
in Titles (9) and (10) above where the research focus itself is presented in
question form.  Sacks et al. (1974) have pointed out how question and answer
work within conversation as an adjacency pair where the question has a role in
raising expectations
<7>
concerning the contents of the answer. In the present
context, we do not have a faceto-face conversational situation, but there is
nevertheless an implicit interaction between writer and reader. The reader in
this situation is not the one who will answer the question- although the mere
fact that it has been raised may set his mind working along possible answers.
Instead, he has a reasonable expectation that it will be answered by the writer
in the paper that follows. The very fact that he has himself already started to
try to answer the question in his mind may encourage him to read the paper to
see how the author deals with the question. This attention-grabbing aim is
especially illustrated by Title (12), where a particularly arresting question
stands at the beginning of the title to serve as an illustration of the type of
sentence the paper will analyse. Even in titles where there is a narrowing of
the focus by a subsequent noun phrase (as in Titles 9 and 12), the answer to the
research question is not divulged. The reader must read the paper to find out
the conclusions to be drawn from the paper. This is unlike what we saw in the
full-sentence titles in science, where the researchers were at pains to present
their results. In the linguistics examples, even where the title is in the form
of an assertion, there is still this attempt to titillate the reader. Title (7),
for example, presents the reader with an unusual metaphor which, by very reason
of its strangeness, virtually necessitates further reading of the paper in order
to understand it, while the three-word Title (11) presents a brief statement
which would be difficult to make anything of without establishing some kind of
context through reading the article.  It is worth noting that, in Gricean terms,
there are very clear-cut differences between the full-sentence titles in the two
disciplines. The scientist’s pragmatic aims are best served by adhering to all
of Grice’s Maxims. (Grice, 1975) Although the maxims represent the implicit
rules speakers follow when engaging in spoken conversation, they could almost be
seen as prescriptive rules for scientific writing in general. On the other hand,
the linguist in his full-sentence titles appears to flout the maxims. Such
titles are not informative in the sense of indicating clearly what the article
is about, and hence they do not adhere to the Maxim of Quantity. They may flout
the Maxim of Relevance by referring to something which- apparently- has nothing
to do with the subject matter. They may deliberately introduce something obscure
or ambiguous and hence flout the Maxim of Manner. Since they are not reporting
facts in their full-sentence titles, however, the Maxim of Quality does not
really apply. It appears that linguists in their full-sentence titles do not
adhere to the Co-operative Principle as scientists do.  3.3. Literature
full-sentence titles The following titles serve as illustrations of literature
papers involving full sentences:- 13. Was Spenser a Republican?  14. ‘Here is my
space’: the politics of Appropriation in Shakespeare’s ‘Antony and Cleopatra’
15. ‘Virgins all beware’: ‘To his coy mistress’ Revisited.
<8>
16. ‘‘Thou seest
mee striue for life’’: Magic, Virtue and the Poetic Imagination in Donne’s
Anniversaries 17. Speak, Memory, But in a Whisper 18. Time’s Up 19. ‘‘I fought
the Law (and I cold won!)’’: Hip-hop in the Mainstream 20. ‘‘Forget those
damnfool realists!’’ Salman Rushdie’s Self Parody as the Magic Realist’s ‘‘Last
Sigh’’ As can be seen, the majority of such titles actually begin with a
quotation in the form of a full sentence, usually from the work that is being
analysed or, in the case of Title (19), presenting a sample of what is to be
analysed in the paper. The form of the sentence quotation in all but two
instances is that of a statement, the two exceptions being Titles (15) and (20),
which are in the form of the imperative. Title (17), also using the imperative
form, looks like a quotation but is not contained within quotation marks. Only
the remaining two titles are full sentences which are not quotations and are not
supported by any noun phrase coming after. Of these, Title (13) asks an
intriguing question, while Title (18) presents a short, colloquial statement,
enigmatic in its brevity. In each case, it is obvious that there is a
straightforward attempt to intrigue the reader. The mean length of literature
titles involving full sentences is 9.7 words, only marginally longer than the
mean length (9.4 words) of all the literature titles in the sample.  Turning to
how the pragmatic aims of attracting the reader to read the whole article are
served in literature full-sentence titles, it is immediately obvious that the
scientific convention of packing in as much information as possible within the
confines of a title does not apply. There are no experimental findings to be
reported and, apart from matters of biography, any new information contained in
the paper is not usually of the factual type. Rather, the emphasis in literature
papers is to lead the reader to new insights and appreciation of the works being
studied, a process which appears to be initiated at the title-reading stage.
However, after reading the article, one can see that these titles themselves
have aesthetic merit that adds to the reader’s appreciation of the paper. To
pick out only one example, Title (18) becomes clear on the fourth page of the
article when one realises that it deals with the publication of Norman Mailer’s
book The Time of our Time to mark his 75th birthday. The writer of the article
does not feel that the standard of the book is very high, but it has been
accepted on the basis of Mailer’s reputation. The whole article is, in effect, a
negative review of the book. Once this is realised, the reader can appreciate
the wordplay and pungent conciseness now revealed in the title. It will also be
noted that the five titles which begin with a quotation could all stand quite
adequately without the quotation. It is the non-quotation element that provides
the information as to the paper’s contents — a fact which may be tacitly
realised in the practice of dispensing with the quotation in the title heading
on each page of the article.  Standing back and looking at the differences in
full-sentence titles across these three disciplines, it can be seen that they
illustrate in cameo the underlying differences referred to in the introduction
distinguishing the disciplines themselves from each other. Thus the
full-sentence titles in science are very bare presentations of
<9>
facts, as
discovered by the researchers, while those in literature tend to be aimed at the
aesthetic sensibilities of the reader. Linguistics falls between these two
extremes, combining elements of the two. On the one hand, the subject matter is
factual and most linguists would regard themselves as ‘scientists’, but the
essential fascination for language that must lie at the heart of any linguists
means that there is an element of the celebratory there too. Thus, true to his
trade, the linguist within the microcosmic scope of the full-sentence title is
more likely to play with the language. If we subscribe to the idea that these
titles function as advertisements, then it is clear that the copywriters (i.e.
the researchers) have done their market research very well.  Interesting as
these full-sentence titles have proven to be, they constitute a very small
percentage of titles in the three disciplines chosen, with over 90% of the
titles in all three disciplines being incomplete syntactic units. In general
terms, these titles could be described in terms of the types and arrangements of
C-units (small independent grammatical units) of the ‘‘stand-alone non-clausal’’
variety described by Leech (2000). Interestingly, Biber et al. (1999) have found
that such units make up about a third of conversational language. Leech (2000)
makes the observation that such phenomena occur much less frequently in written
grammar, and cites titles as one area where they are routinely found. However,
our figure of above 90% shows that they are much more frequent in titles than in
speech. The reason given by Biber et al. (op. cit.) for the appearance of these
reduced structures in speech is that they relieve pressure on the working
memory. In the written medium, there is not the same load on memory, but there
is still load on the reader in the form of information processing. Leech’s
interpretation of these C-units as performing a streamlining role in
conversational speech (p.  699) may, therefore, be just as applicable here, but
with the economy of expression being aimed at eliminating elements that are
nonessential in terms of the information being transmitted. The remainder of the
paper aims at exploring how this is done.  4. Compound titles As indicated at
the beginning of the paper, one of the most common forms of title is where two
noun phrases (or non-clausal C-units) are juxtaposed on either side of (most
usually) a colon, a full stop or a dash. The figures for this type of title in
the three disciplines are presented in Table 2.
<10>
As can be seen, the
percentage of science papers having this type of title is the lowest of the
three groups (21.5%), while the figure is almost trebled in the case of the
literature papers (60.8%), for which this type of title is the most favoured.
With 30.4% of the linguistics papers carrying this type of title, linguistics
falls between the other two groups, but is closer to science on this parameter.
A Chi square test showed the differences to be highly significant (c=56, df=2,
p<0.001).These intergroup differences in frequencies are also matched by
differences of form.  4.1. Compound science titles The following list provides
some representative examples of this type of title: 21. Genome sequencing and
informatics: New tools for biochemical discoveries 22. Two neoarchean
supercontinents? Evidence from the Paleoproterozoic 23. Possible indicators of
microbial mat deposits in shales and sandstones: Examples from the
mid-proterozoic belt supergroup 24. Compartment-specific accumulation of
recombinant immunoglobulins in plant cells: an essential tool for antibody
production and immunomodulation of physiological functions and pathogen activity
25. Morphological and genetic differentiation of Patella granularis (Gastropoda:
Patellidae): recognition of two sibling species along the coast of southern
Africa 26. Coping with complexity: lessons from the mathematical sciences One
reason for the high frequency of this type of title may perhaps be traced to the
advice given in books about how to write research papers. Lester (1993), for
instance, presents six strategies for writing a title, three of which involve
two elements separated by a colon. Of these, one involves providing a general
subject followed by a colon followed by ‘‘a phrase that renames the subject.’’
In fact, the example he provides (Computer Control: Software Safeguards and
Computer Theft) shows more than a simple renaming of the first noun phrase.
Instead, there is a noun phrase indicating a general topic, followed by an
expanded phrase in which the particular aspects of that general topic to be
dealt with are specified. In the examples of compound science papers given
above, the first NP indicates the area of the research, while the second NP
either indicates the application of that research (as in Titles 21 and 24) or
provides some information to help locate what was worked on either in a
geographic sense or from within the discipline, according to the field of study
(as in Titles 22, 23, 25 and 26). In both cases, it could be said that there is
a narrowing down, focussing either on where the study has come from or on where
it might point to, both of which may be useful to the reader by positioning the
research not only through indicating the particular point (or topic) studied,
but also by giving directional information that could look either backwards or
forwards. We have already alluded to the fact that the scientist trying to keep
abreast of the latest developments in his field must nowadays read a number of
journals, each of which is published within a fairly narrow range of
specialisation. Assuming he is a regular reader of certain key journals in his
field, his need is to locate those papers which
<11>
deal with the particular
questions relating to his own research. It is useful, therefore, for him to have
an early announcement of the subject area of the paper. This can be achieved
even before starting to read any article through a three-tier structure of
information comprising: (1) the journal title itself, which gives the broad (but
specialised) area, and the article title which narrows the focus to (2) a
particular subarea and then (3) a particular thrust leading to or emanating from
that. It is obvious, therefore, that this title format is ideally suited to the
scientist’s needs and at this preliminary stage of the paper-reading process
presents an extremely efficient example of information packaging or ‘‘the
tailoring of an utterance by a sender to meet the particular assumed needs of
the intended receiver.’’ (Prince, 1981) It is worth underlining the point that
the information being provided is by way of mapping the location of the paper’s
subject matter within the field. This differentiates such titles quite
remarkably from the full-sentence titles referred to above. In the latter, the
information was a synoptic account of the paper’s findings. They, therefore,
provide what Dahl (1976: 38) calls propositional information. In these compound
titles, no full proposition is being transmitted. Instead, such titles present
juxtaposed ‘‘elements of information’’ (Lambrecht, 1994) which, nevertheless,
are highly meaningful to the targeted professional reader. In such cases, the
scientist has to read the paper for full propositional information. However, it
is important to note that such titles could be expressed in propositional form
(e.g. This paper deals with the X in Y). That they are not, is a recognition of
the redundancy of this proposition here, since the reader can easily assume that
this is indeed a paper dealing with X and Y purely from the presence of X and Y
themselves and from his knowledge of the world, specifically that a title
usually tells you something about what the paper printed underneath it is about.
The parallel with the streamlining operating in the use of C-units in
conversation is also useful here. Leech (2000) refers to the ‘‘add-on
principle’’, where speech is constructed by the chaining together of simple
‘‘clause-like chunks’’ which progressively add on further units of information
in such a way that processing is made easier. The simple juxtaposition of noun
phrases in titles also leads to ease of processing.  Returning to our analogy
between research article titles and advertisements, it may be instructive to
consider that Leech (1966: 114) has commented on the use of independent nominal
groups in advertising English to function as full clauses (e.g.  ‘‘Escudo — a
marvellous tobacco blended from just two kinds of leaf’’). He refers to such
arrangements as ‘‘sub-logical’’, meaning that the logical relations underlying
their juxtaposition are not overt, as in a full proposition, but implied. There
seems an obvious parallel here with the redundancy we have assumed in these
titles. It will be observed that the first nominal in Leech’s example is the
product name, a feature also noted by Rush (1998). In the case of the title, we
have pointed out that the first nominal deals with a sub-area within the much
wider research field. The parallel with advertising seems clear. To those who
may be passing by — or perusing the journal — the title writer is calling his wares,
which he announces implicitly by referring to the particular sub-area he is
targeting within the field. By doing this usually at the very beginning of the
title, he thereby obeys a convention dictated by a perceived need of the reader
i.e. that the information regarding the paper’s contents
<12>
be received as
speedily as possible. In relation to the informativeness of statements, Strawson
(1964) has made a useful distinction between what he calls the ‘‘Principle of
the Presumption of Knowledge’’ which says that informativeness is not achieved
in a vacuum- the listener/reader always knows something already - and the
‘‘Principle of the Presumption of Ignorance’’ which says that the speaker/writer
must make a hypothesis regarding the current state of knowledge in the mind of
his listener/ hearer. Thus, the researcher has to decide what might already be
familiar to the reader (realised in the brief designation of a sub-area within
the field) and then draw his attention to what he hypothesizes the reader is
ignorant of, namely in this instance what his own work focuses on. Without an
adequate assessment of the former, the latter by itself might not achieve a
successful transmission of information. Both full propositional and compound
titles capitalize on the reader’s presumed knowledge of the field in general
since they are couched in highly specialised language. However, whereas the full
propositional title targets the reader’s presumed ignorance of the particular
findings of the researcher, the compound title targets the reader’s presumed
ignorance of the particular thrust of the paper. Thus, we might paraphrase a
title of this type (e.g. Title 26 above: Coping with complexity: lessons from
the mathematical sciences) as You know the problem of coping with complexity;
well I’m going to pass on some lessons about this from the mathematical
sciences.  4.2. Compound literature titles Turning to literature compound
titles, the first point to note is that, whereas in scientific compound titles
the juxtaposed elements are noun phrases, in the literature compound titles, the
elements are more varied in form and include participial phrases, prepositional
phrases and infinitive phrases e.g.  27. Circling the spheres: A Dialogue 28.
from Minding the Darkness: A poem through imagining 29. To Witness Spectacles of
Pain: The Hypermorality of George Bataille A striking feature is the use of a
quotation as the first element, of which 23 cases appeared in the sample. In
some, the quotation serves as an illustration or example of what the following
element (and hence the paper) is about e.g.  30. ‘‘My sister! My sister!’’; The
rhetoric of Catherine Sedgewick’s Hope Leslie 31. ‘‘I Fought the Law (and I cold
won)’’: Hip-hop in the mainstream The pragmatic rationale here seems to be to
attract by means of showing the technical creativity of the paper writer in
coming up with the apposite quotation. In other cases, there is no apparent
connection between the quotation and the second element e.g.  32. ‘‘The
assurance to write, the vanity of expecting to be read’’: Deception and Reform
in Mary Davys’s ‘‘The reform’d Coquet’’
<13>
33. ‘‘What about a problem that
doesn’t have a Solution?’’ Stone’s ‘‘A Flag for Sunrise’’, DeLillo’s ‘‘Mao II’’,
and the politics of Political Fiction The writer in these cases presents an
elegant puzzle again solvable only by reading the paper. Title (32), for
example, presents a quotation from the book being reviewed which allows the
author of the paper to make the point that the original author admits to the
vanity of expecting to be read, a quality she obliterates in her heroine. Thus
there is some playing with the idea of deception. Title (33) is unravelled when
it becomes clear that the writer of the paper is taking issue with critics who
feel that American novelists have not dealt with the impasse, or ‘‘utterly
intractable’’ problems, of political difficulties and reviews the two works
referred to in the title in support of his views. In all cases, again, the
quotation is redundant from the point of view of giving the information that
would pinpoint the topic of the paper and at this preliminary stage may even, as
we have seen, obscure matters. Any actual information being provided via the
quotation is thus done so indirectly, focussing perhaps on what it is hoped the
reader will deduce regarding the attributes of the author of the article and the
elegance of the paper rather than on an explicit conveying of what the actual
topic is. Rather, at this preliminary, title-reading stage of the paper-reading
process, the reader is already being pushed into a thinking mode where he tries
to work out the allusions or connections that the paper-writer wants him to see
and may therefore be nudged into reading the paper in order to unravel the
mystery. In all cases, if the quotation is removed, the title remains perfectly
viable. The same effect is found even in cases where the first element is not a
quotation, e.g.  34. The unknown soldier and the return of the fallen: The
political dimension of mourning in German texts from the first world war to the
present 35. Refined Law: The Symbolic Violence of Victims’ Rights Reforms While
this may indicate a sharpening of focus in the second element, this role of the
first element as providing authorial insight and/or the initial impetus towards
sharing the writer’s take on his topic does not match the narrowing down already
discussed above in the science titles. Whereas narrowing down in science titles
involves a very precise (and hence wordy) specification of the area or research
application within the field that the research is tackling, in literature titles
this is achieved more economically by incorporating the title of the work, the
name(s) of the character(s) or the name(s) of the author(s) under analysis. It
is this element that can stand alone as the ‘‘true’’ title. e.g.  36. ‘‘Here is
my space’’: The politics of appropriation in Shakespeare’s ‘Antony and
Cleopatra’ 37. Doing things with words: Another look at marriage rites and
spousals in Renaissance Drama and Fiction 38. Facing the invisible sphinx: About
the writing of the ‘‘L’Homme Moyen Sensuel’’
<14>
Once again, any enigma in such
titles is removed on reading the paper. Thus, Title (37) refers to the
performatives of J. L. Austin with an adaptation of his famous title ‘‘How to do
things with words.’’ The paper rests on the point that as late as the mid18th
century it was possible for two people to effect their marriage simply through
declaring they were man and wife. Title (38) seems even more puzzling, but a
reading of the paper reveals that the author is writing about his difficulties
in writing his book about the 1932–33 famine in the Ukraine. This catastrophe,
he says, is like a sphinx asking the question, ‘‘Why does no one see me?’’
Again, once one understands its meaning, the title becomes an embellishment of
the paper but, in order to reach this stage of appreciation, the reader does,
after all, have to succumb to the enticing lure and actually read the article.
4.3. Compound linguistics titles Turning to compound titles in linguistics
papers, it has already been noted that, as far as frequency goes, our sample
shows that they fall between science and literature, although closer to the
scientific total. However, in terms of the internal information structure of
compound linguistics titles, they very much adhere to the pattern found in
compound science titles. All cases begin with a phrase indicating a general
topic (e.g. Lexical inventions) followed by another phrase indicating the status
or nature of the research reported (e.g. a preliminary report, a re-examination,
an introduction) or the particular approach used or area targeted (e.g. French
interlanguage as L2 versus L3). Unlike literature compound titles, they present
no intriguing puzzle for the reader to work out regarding what the writer is up
to in his paper. Rather, they follow the scientific pattern, with the first
element most commonly presenting the ‘known’ sub-area and the second indicating
the new contribution presented by the research. Some examples are: 39. Noun
incorporation. New evidence from Athapaskan 40. Language policy, language
education, language rights: Indigenous, immigrant and international perspectives
41. Subject-verb agreement in Brazilian Portuguese; what low error rates hide
42. Perception and control; a minimalist analysis of English direct perception
complements.
<15>
<-1>